arXiv:hep-th/0306074 v1   9 Jun 2003 SCIPP-03/06, RUNHETC-2003-16 A Critique of Pure String Theory: Heterodox Opinions of Diverse Dimensions T. Banks Department of Physics and Institute for Particle Physics University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064 and Department of Physics and Astronomy, NHETC Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08540 E-mail: banks@scipp.ucsc.edu ABSTRACT I present a point of view about what M Theory is and how it is related to the real world that departs in certain crucial respects from conventional wisdom. I argue against the possibility of a background independent formulation of the theory, or of a Poincare in- variant, Supersymmetry violating vacuum state. A fundamental assumption is black hole dominance of high energy physics.Much of this paper is a compilation of things I have said elsewhere. I review a crude argument for the critical exponent connecting the gravitino mass and the cosmological constant, and propose a framework for the finding a quantum theory of de Sitter space. 1 1. Introduction: The Conventional Wisdom String theory, although it is a theory of gravity, is a creation of particle physicists. Traditional string phenomenology shows its pedigree by asking for an exact solution of a purported theory of everything, which exhibits exact Poincare symmetry (a symmetry which is clearly only approximate in the real world). This theory is supposed to describe the scattering of particles in the real world, which is thus postulated to be insensitive to the cosmological nature of the universe. The basis for this assumption is locality, a property that is evidently only approxi- mately true of string theory at low energy. Super Planckian scattering is dominated by black hole production[1] , and the spectrum and properties of black holes of sufficiently high energy are definitely affected by the global structure of the universe. By continuity, there are effects on low energy physics as well. The only question is how large they are. At any rate, a principal defect of this approach is that it already postulates two math- ematically consistent solutions of the theory of everything, namely the real, cosmological, world, and the exact Poincare invariant solution. In fact, as is well known, the situation is much worse than that. There are many disconnected continuous families of Poincare invariant solutions of string theory. They have various dimensions, low energy fields, and topologies, but they all share the property of exact SUSY. The program of string phe- nomenology is to find a SUSY violating, Poincare invariant solution of the theory, which describes low energy scattering in the real world. In [2] I expressed the opinion that no such solution exists. Be that as it may, the string phenomenologist, having found the holy grail of a Poincare invariant, SUSY violating, ”realistic” theory, will still be faced with the question of why it is preferred over all of the vacuum states with exact supersymmetry. By contrast, if one adopts the hypothesis of cosmological SUSY breaking (CSB) pro- posed in [2] , this problem is solved at a stroke. The theory of the real world has a finite number of states1 and can be neither Poincare invariant, nor supersymmetric. Since the number of states in the real world is e10120, it would not be surprising to find that some of the properties of the real world are well approximated by those of a Poincare invariant 1 The suggestion that the dS entropy represented a bound on the number of states in dS space first arose in conversations initiated by W. Fischler. I asked Fischler to be a coauthor on [2], but he declined on the grounds that he had not contributed to the ideas about SUSY breaking. Fischler talked about the finite number of states at the Festschrift for G. West in the Spring of 2000[3]. 2 theory, which I will call the limiting vacuum. By the arguments (reviewed below) of [2] , this limiting theory must be SUSic and have no moduli. The combination of these two properties and the general structure of SUSic theories imply that it must be four dimen- sional, with onlyN = 1 SUSY, and have an exact complex R symmetry2. This puts strong constraints on the low energy effective theory in the limiting vacuum. I have described approaches to the low energy phenomenology of CSB in a recent paper[4]. In this paper I want to summarize a collection of ideas that I have been playing with since 1999. They form a context in which the hypothesis of CSB is seen as a natural extension of the facts we already know about M-theory. These ideas are only loosely connected and have not yet jelled into a consistent alternative to the conventional wisdom about the way in which string theory is connected tothe real world. Iam setting them down here in the hope that others can make more progress thinking about them than I have. If these ideas are even partially correct, then they imply that some of our fundamental assumptions have been wrong, and I think it is important that we revise them. The key concepts revolve around the search for the fundamental degrees of freedom of a quantum theory of gravity, and the conviction that these are intimately connected with the high energy behavior of the theory. All of our experience with quantum theories suggests this connection. This is nowhere more evident than in Feynman’s path integral formulation of quantum mechanics. The key step in the derivation of the path integral is the exact evaluation of the short time propagation kernel, and the key assumption is that the short time behavior is dominated by a free theory. In this view, all of the formalism of classical mechanics and canonical quantization is a consequence of the assumption of what we have learned to call a Gaussian fixed point. For this reason, I will call theories whose short time behavior is dominated by a Gaussian fixed point, Lagrangian theories. Wilson’s view of general quantum field theory as constructed from relevant perturba- tions of general fixed point theories, may be thought of as an extension of Feynman’s princi- ple. Again, the high energy behavior defines the theory. It has been our fortune/misfortune to, for the most part, be able to access non-Gaussian fixed point theories as infrared (IR) limits of Lagrangian theories. Another avenue to non-Gaussian fixed point theories has been through cutoff models, mostly arising from statistical mechanics. The resemblance of the statistical sums in these models to discretized path integrals has helped to obscure the non-Lagrangian nature of the fixed points. It is only with the discovery of fixed points 2 One must also use the fact that the theory has a dS deformation to prove this. 3 like the (2,0) theory in six dimensions, which have not yet been realized as infrared limits of Gaussian models (this is impossible) or discretized statistical sums (this is possible but unknown at the moment) that we have been forced to face the truly radical departure from Lagrangian dynamics that a non-Gaussian fixed point implies. It is my opinion, that in attempting to construct a theory of quantum gravity we should again look to the high energy behavior of the theory. When we do so, we are faced with several shocks. Firstly, the traditional connection between high energy and short distance disappears. Even in perturbative string theory, high energy physics is dominated by long strings. More generally, in any theory containing gravity there will be black holes. The Bekenstein-Hawking formula for the entropy of black holes suggests that they dominate the high energy spectrum[5], and semiclassical black hole dynamics suggests that they are metastable. Recent verifications [6] that the Bekenstein-Hawking formula indeed refers to a microscopic count of all of the states of a black hole, lend credence to this point of view. Arguments to be reviewed below suggest that high energy scattering processes are dominated by black hole production. The result of these considerations is a radical new principle, which I consider to be the ultimate form of the UV/IR correspondence : High Energy Dynamics is dominated by large black holes, some of whose properties can be calculated using the semiclassical Lagrangian formulation of general relativity. At the Davidfest in Santa Barbara, I called this principle Asymptotic Darkness. The fact that certain features of black holes are describable in the IR limiting theory is a direct consequence of the UV/IR connection. The GR description of black holes is however incomplete. It can give partial evidence for a huge set of states associated with the black hole but cannot give a microscopic quantum description of their properties. The assumption that black holes dominate the high energy physics of quantum grav- ity, and thus should be taken as a clue to the whereabouts of the fundamental degrees of freedom, has several dramatic consequences. First of all, it immediately suggests the Holo- graphic Principle [7] : degrees of freedom should be associated with (d?2) dimensional areas in spacetime, rather than with points. At very high energy densities, space is filled with black holes and the area scaling of entropy becomes manifest. Fischler, Susskind and Bousso [8] have shown how to formulate this principle for a general spacetime. In space- times with appropriate3 asymptotic boundaries one can see that this suggests a formulation 3 I will explain below why I think this idea does not generalize to the spacelike boundaries of asymptotically de Sitter (dS) spaces. 4 in terms of degrees of freedom on the boundary. This fits in with arguments from string theory and quantum gravity, that the only observables in a theory of quantum gravity in asymptotically flat or AdS spacetimes are boundary correlators like the S-matrix. The AdS/CFT [9] correspondence is the most complete and successful realization of this idea. I want to emphasize that one can view the above line of reasoning as a way of guessing or deriving the AdS/CFT correspondence. Namely, the spectrum of black holes in asymptotically AdS spacetimes is that of a conformal field theory living on the boundary. Asymptotic Darkness, and the associated Holographic Principle then suggest that the dynamics of the spacetime is completely captured by such a conformal field theory (or a relevant perturbation of it). We now know that this is true in many cases. For asymptotically flat spacetimes the consequences of the UV/IR connection are more dramatic. Black hole dominance implies that quantum correlation functions of op- erators that do not distinguish the degenerate microstates of black holes are not tempered distributions in time, nor even the more singular distributions of quasilocal field theories [5] [10]. This means there is no way to localize the theory in time. Curiously, the black hole spectrum is consistent with locality (quasilocality for four asymptotically flat dimen- sions) in light cone time, which might suggest a reason for the ubiquitous presence of the light cone frame in Hamiltonian formulations of quantum gravity in asymptotically flat spacetime. A holographic formulation of nonperturbative quantum gravity in certain asymptot- ically flat spacetimes is provided by Matrix Theory [11]. At present it is formulated only in the approximation of discrete Light Cone Quantization (DLCQ). It is tempting to try to formulate a theory of asymptotically flat quantum gravity in more covariant terms, as a theory on null infinity. Existing descriptions of massless particles at null infinity suggest that one should not think of this as a dynamical theory. All the coordinates of null infinity are spatial (in the sense that longitudinal and transverse coordinates are treated as spatial coordinates in light cone frame). Instead, dynamics is encoded in the fact that null infinity is not a manifold , and splits naturally into two disjoint cones with a common boundary at spatial infinity. Nontrivial correlation functions in the theory are those which contain points on both components, and are nothing but the matrix elements of the S-matrix. The question that arises (a question to which there is as yet no answer) is what the dynamical principle is that determines the S-matrix. I will not discuss null infinity much in this paper. 5 The above discussion, and [12] make it clear (to me at least) that the old dream of background independence in string theory is a chimera. We already know that the various asymptotically AdS spacetimes for which we have discovered the full quantum theory, are not vacua of the same theory. They are unitary quantum theories without degenerate vacua 4 . Some of them are related by deformation by relevant or marginal parameters or by compactifying one field theory and taking a limit, but this is not what we usually mean by a theory having multiple vacua. It is also significant that the cosmological constant in these theories is a discretely tunable, fundamental parameter which encodes properties of the fundamental UV theory, rather than a low energy effective parameter, characteristic of a given IR representation of the algebra of quantum operators (what we usually mean by a choice of vacuum in QFT). It is even more obvious that these are not vacua of a theory that also includes asymp- totically flat spacetimes, since the latter have a radically different spectrum of high energy states, and their state spaces carry representations of different maximal spacetime sym- metry groups. Rather the two classes of theories are related by the fact that the AdS theories are decoupling limits of certain configurations in asymptotically flat space. It is also possible, that one can recover certain flat space theories by taking large radius limits of AdS theories with free parameters[13]. It is virtually certain that not all asymptotically flat vacua can be retrieved in this fashion. In [12] I argued that asymptotically flat theories also broke up into disjoint families that are not states in the same theory. I will review these arguments below. The key features unifying all of these bizarre properties of quantum gravity are the fact that geometry responds to dynamics, and the UV/IR connection, which intimately entwines the large scale geometry (which in the traditional view is the vacuum dependent part of the dynamics, to which the high energy behavior is insensitive ) with the high energy spectrum (which I have argued should be thought of as the domain where the fundamental degrees of freedom are defined). This viewpoint suggests very strongly that our traditional view of the cosmological constant problem is in error. The traditional view is that there is one theory, which can have various infrared behaviors, characterized by positive, negative or vanishing cosmological constant. The calculation of the cosmological 4 Even the famous moduli spaces are not there if we think of these as theories in AdS space, so that the CFT is compactified on a sphere, rather than as theories of branes embedded in flat space. 6 